title: Improving American Football
date: June 20, 2019
author: Rich James

# American football has problems and needs help

I grew up watching American football (hence forth, "football") starting in the 70's and still do to this day.  Like so many others, I cared very much about the games, who won, who would make the playoffs, who would win the Super Bowl.  I became a Dallas Cowboys fan after initially being a Baltimore Colts fan.  My dad had a first cousin who played wide receiver for the Colts back when Johnny Unitas was their quarterback, so naturally I was a fan.  But I switched allegiance to the Cowboys in the mid-70's for the simple reason that they were a good team and both my dad and brother liked them.

So I enjoyed many years backing a really good team.  Of course, in more recent years, the Cowboys have struggled, but I have stayed a fan of the team.  I keep hoping they will return to greatness and become the dominant team they once were.  I know that the league deliberately structured things to bring parity into the league and I agree with that.  And it has had its intended affect for the most part.  We do still have the New England Patriots, who seem to defy all adversities and stay a strong contender every year.  I chaulk that up to them being an extremely well run organization with an outstanding coach.

All that said, I also have thought for a number of years now that football is flawed and only getting worse.  The sport has a vast number of rules and each year, the rules committee tinkers with the rules, changing some that had existed and adding more.  But it has gotten so bad that it is hard to see how players, much less the fans, can know all the rules.  The game has become a microcosm of the American legal morrass. You need a lawyer to navigate our legal system and you need 7 referees (on the field) and at least 2 more off field to control an NFL game.  You also need video replay in order to parse the minutia of events that occur on the field in order to apply highly detailed rules.  And we still are not always sure how to interpet these rules, thus the TV commentators usually have on hand an NFL rules executive to weigh in with an opinion on whether the game officials are making the right call or not.  It's an unwieldly mess.

Much of this has happened so that the NFL game can be made more attractive to TV audiences.  Many rules protect receivers and quarterbacks, making spectacular pass plays more likely to happen.  Some of the more recent rules have been created in an attempt to improve player safety, which is understandable.  But I think they are going about it all wrong.

My philosophy regarding sports is that a sport is best if it is reduced to its essential elements, with minimal rules that leave the rest to the actual players.  I like soccer very much.  One reason I find it attractive is that it is a far simpler game than football.  You line up 11 players on each side of a field, define two goals, give them a ball, tell them they may not use their hands, and that the object of the game is to get the ball in the opponent's goal.  That is pretty much it.  Of course, soccer has more rules than that.  Some, I would do away with (the offside rule, for example).  But the rules are really pretty minimal.  There are rules that enforce that you must play the ball, not make deliberate contact with the opponent.  In my philosophy, you could argue that it should be anything goes:  just find a way to get the ball intothe opponent's goal.  It would likely make scoring goals in a modern goal almost impossible, so you might have to change the game to say just get the ball across the opponent's end line, for example.  But I really like the idea of making it a very simple game with very few rules and just let the players play.

So back to football.  They have rules to protect quarterbacks now, almost from even breathing on them.  I would eliminate these rules.  Teams will have to find bigger, stronger quarterbacks that can stand back there and perform under duress.  They may have to field multiple quarterbacks rather than depending on a single, highly specialized one.

They have rules to protect players.  No spearing, no launching oneself like a missle at an opponent, and so on.  I would eliminate helmets and pads from the game.  Even with those protections, players get hurt.  Often, they suffer season ending injuries.  But because they wear helmets and pads, they also have incentives to attempt more dangerous play.  I doubt anyone would launch themselves headfirst into an opponent if they were not wearing helmets and pads.  There are rugby leagues in North America and Europe.  Those players wear minimal pads.  No facemasks, helmets that mostly protect ears, and little if any other padding.  Yes, they get hurt.  But not inordinately so.  The players play differently when they have less padding.  I think NFL players would do the same.

It would be more honest to make these changes.  Football is a gladiator sport.  People watch it for the physical violence it presents.  They admire the skill of good players too.  Great running backs that juke and move to make the defenders miss their tackles are impressive.  I realize, however, that these changes would likely severely change the passing game.  I would consider eliminating pass interference.  The rule should be: when the ball is in the air it is a free-for-all for anyone to gain possession.  No one has an innate right to catch it.  Blocking is already allowed in football and that means physically impairing the other player from moving where he wants to move.  I see no reason why this shouldn't apply to trying to catch a ball.  In fact, in football, if the ball is tipped by the defense on its way to its intended target, you can knock each other down in an attempt to catch the ball.  I see no need for a special rule that says when you can do this and when you can't.  The principle should just be: if the ball is loose (i.e. not in a player's possession), it is a free-for-all and anyone can get the ball and knock or block other players attempting to get the ball.  Consider that with these changes, new types of plays would be developed.  It would be legal to pick a defender anywhere on the field to free up a receiver.  Defenses would have to adapt to that.  

To further simplify the game, they should eliminate the eligible receiver rule.  Anyone is eligible to catch the ball.  That would blow the game wide open and compensate for the difficulty in getting a man free.  It would also put teams to a test: do we put a bunch of good hands guys on the line of scrimmage or do we emphasize using big guys to block and protect the quarterback and open lanes for the running back?

These aren't an exhaustive list of changes that should be made, but they do illustrate the concept of simplifying the sport by eliminating rules and equipment to help render to a more primal, natural basis.  The sport today has become a big turn off to me.  I actually don't enjoy watching the game much anymore.  I still do, mostly out of habit (and hope that it will improve), but I often just don't even tune in these days.  While I know none of these ideas will ever be adopted, it's still fun to think about and dream of what could be.

