title: Golf is Sublime.  Golf Sucks.
date: June 11, 2019
author: Rich James

# Golf is a tease.  It is fickle.  It will mesmerize you.  It will tear your heart out.

I have worked quite a lot at become a decent golfer.  Not that I get to play much. In fact, I hardly play at all -- maybe twice or three times in a year.  That doesn't count chip and pitch par 3 courses.  But I have spent massive time watching golf videos on youtube, working on my mechanics in my living room and out at the range.  And I have developed a pretty good swing as a result.

But I have certain swing flaws that aggravate me.  They aren't unique to me.  Most amateur golfers struggle with these things.  I sometimes hit it fat (i.e. chunk the ball, i.e. hit the ground behind the ball).  Some days I hit it quite straight.  Others, I push to the right or pull to the left.  I can hit nice high iron shots, but they don't go as far as I think they should.

So in my searching around and from discussing these things with my dad and brother, I stumbled upon Rotary Swing Golf.  This is yet another golf instructor online who will sell you his system and you get access to hundreds of videos explaining and teaching how to swing the club better.  Now while there are plenty of these guys out there and I, being a very skeptical sort of guy, normally will not buy what they are selling, in this case I did just that.  I did that because the concepts I saw Chuck (the founder) talking about in his free videos resonated strongly with me.  They made great sense.  He breaks the swing down into comprehensible parts and explains the why, including the body mechanics.  Anyhow, he spoke to me, so I bought his system.

And I am a huge fan.  He has helped me hit the ball more consistently and farther than I ever have.  I now rarely hit a fat shot.  My distance is better.  My new swing flaw, when I have one, is to hook it left.  But everything I have been doing now is quite playable.  I could take this to the course and actually feel like I am a decent golfer.

Well, except when it all comes crashing down, which is just what it did over the past 3 days.  I was at the cusp of hitting the best shots of my life.  I had learned to keep my wrists and forearms relaxed and allow the downswing to actually increase lag, which I then would release at impact.  This was producing really nice, long shots with relatively little effort.  But, toward the end of a large bucket of balls last Friday, I suddenly started hitting shanks. Basically, hitting the ball off the heel or even the heel/shaft part of the club.  The ball would shoot off right in an extreme slice with little or no air.  I tried to fix this, but was not able to get rid of it.  Sure, some hits would still be good ones, but those shanks would rear right back up.  That meant there was no consistency anymore.

I chaulked it up to fatique after hitting a large bucket and went home.  I wasn't mad.  Frustrated a bit, yes.  But mostly puzzled over why I started hitting those and what was it I was doing to cause it.  My brother and I had plans to play a round of golf (yay!) at his club on the following Tuesday.  I was really looking forward to that.  So I knew I needed to get back out and regroove my swing before we got out there.

So on Monday, I headed back out, got a medium bucket of balls and got to work.  And, crap, right off -- still the shanks.  Really ugly, ugly shots and contact.  I stayed calm and focused on fundamentals.  I tried to use the 9 to 3 drill to get back the feel of correct contact with the ball.  That drill has never been real good for me and it wasn't then either.  I tried all kinds of things, but over the entire medium bucket, I hit maybe 85% shanks/crap shots.  I looked and felt like a rank beginner.  Yes, some shots were decent contact.  They always went high and straight left.  So, basically, a pull left.  Not a hook.  While it was nice to hit some into the air, even that was not playable.  I needed to be able to hit where I was aiming, not 20-30 yards left of that.

I went back to the shack and got another, small bucket so I could keep working out the issues.  Well, no need to belabor this sad story any longer.  I didn't work it out.  I left that day with a million questions in my mind, trying to sort out what the heck I had started doing so wrong.  With that small bucket, I got out my phone and recorded me hitting balls from both the face-on view and the down-the-line view.  At least I had that to look at when I got home so I could maybe figure out what I was doing.  

So I had to cancel the golf outing with my brother.  Such a bummer! And this is why I say golf tears your heart out.  I don't get to play much in the first place. And I don't get to see my brother as often as I like either.  And I was primed, really hitting the ball extremely well right as we were about to go out and play 18 holes.  And then golf says, "Nope! I'm taking it all back!  You suck and have no business being out there.  You have much work still to do."

And I'll do that work.  I'm sorting through the issues as we speak. Video review seems to show I have started pushing with my right leg on the downswing.  I've become too right-sided again.  This is probably from me getting sloppy and trying to add more power to my swing to get better distance.  At least, this is one of my theories.  What I need to work on is the core fundamental of the lower body rotating first, getting the shoulders to be square or even slightly close at impact, keeping my posture and fully releasing the club.  And I really do need to focus on closing the clubface at least some when on the downswing.  I need those left hand nuckles to roll downward as I swing through the impact area.

Well, it's a sad story.  It's my sad story.  It isn't truly important.  This is golf after all, just hitting a little ball into a hole.  

Except, it's so much more than that.  It's about personal performamce.  Executing a skill that requires physical coordination, timing, finesse and power.  It also requires judgement, at least when actually playing.  Not every swing is a full swing.  Not every lie is a flat lie on fairway grass.  And, all else aside, when you hit a ball pure, in the sweet spot, the way it is supposed to be hit, it feels magical.  And you want to do that again and again and again.

And I will.
